New `www` page to explain mocking (#4017)
trpc/trpc: www/docs/client/mocking.md

---
id: Mocking
title: Mocking your server
sidebar_label: Mocking your server
slug: /mocking
---

Mocking tRPC gives you the ability to isolate your frontend components into testing or presentation environments without having to alter how they behave.

By intercepting our tRPC calls at the [Service Worker level](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API) and returning responses as the component expects, mocking can help you to:

- Write performant, easy to execute tests that don't rely on changing the underlying component in any way
- Present componenets in frontend workshops like Storybook exactly as they would appear and behave in your main app

> The examples below use [Jest](https://facebook.github.io/jest/docs/en/tutorial-react.html), (React Testing Library)[https://github.com/testing-library/react-testing-library], and [Mock Service Worker](https://www.npmjs.com/package/msw-trpc) (MSW), but the concepts apply to any testing framework.

Author: Sound good, updated to Vitest in this line and I believe that the only difference is that `it` should now be `test`. Would appreciate a second eye on that though as I am unfamiliar with Vitest

> ## Creating a TRPCMockedProvider

Reviewer: I personally prefer `MockedTRPCProvider` as it makes it more obvious what it is, but don't feel strongly about this

Every test for a React component that uses your `tRPC client` must make it available in React's context.

- In React, you achieve this by wrapping your component tree with the `trpc.Provider` and `QueryClientProvider` components.
- In Next.js, this step is abstracted in `_app.ts` by using `trpc.withTRPC(MyApp)`.

> In tests however, this context is not avaliable by default. Instead, you will need to expose this context by creating a `TRPCMockedProvider`.

Reviewer: This section reads a bit confusing to me. Here's my attempt:

In order for tRPC's hooks to work, they require context that describes the URL of the backend and the structure of the API.

- In React, you achieve this by wrapping your component tree with the `trpc.Provider` and `QueryClientProvider` components.
- In Next.js, this step is abstracted in `_app.ts` by using `trpc.withTRPC(MyApp)`.

We still need this context when using our components in a testing environment, but we want the requests to be made to a mocked version of our API as this allows us test the frontend in isolation. For this, we will need a mocked provider.

Author: Thank you. I like your version a lot better.

I've made two minor, additional tweaks:
- I've added a link to our documentation on context, as I think that if you don't have context on what `context` is, this sentence could be confusing. 
- I've played around the the phrasing of the last paragraph to make it clear that our mocked provider is enabling the component to make requests as it normally would and that mocking the API is something we'll do later. It's minor change but I think this illustrates the difference that this current step is making a little more clearly

> In order for tRPC's hooks to work, they require [context](https://trpc.io/docs/context) that describes the URL of the backend and the structure of the API.

> - In React, you achieve this by wrapping your component tree with the `trpc.Provider` and `QueryClientProvider` components.
> - In Next.js, this step is abstracted in `_app.ts` by using `trpc.withTRPC(MyApp)`.

> We still need this context when using our components in an isolated environment, because they still need to be capable of making requests that we will later intercept and pass through the mocked version of our API. For this, we will need to create and use a mocked provider.

### 1. Initialize a new React hook

> Create a new file for your `MockedProvider` and import your `AppRouter` type from where your standard tRPC router is defined. This will ensure that your eventual mocking is typed to the standard signature of your entire API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file for your `MockedProvider` and import your `AppRouter` type from where your standard tRPC router is defined. This will ensure that your mocks have the same type signature as your API.
```

Also there seems to be some inconsistency between `MockedProvider` and `trpcMockedProvider`. I think these are referring to the same thing?

Author: Agreed! Thank you I have updated all the naming to be more consistent and follow the styling rule that:
- `Mocked` is always the first word if it is included
- `TRPC` is always capitalized or (lower case if at the start of a variable name)

```ts title='trpcMockedProvider.ts'
import type { AppRouter } from "../path/to/server/trpc";
```

> Next, create a set of React hooks from your `AppRouter` type signature with `createTRPCReact`, as all the tests and isolated environments we want to render our components in will be in a React environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a set of React hooks from your `AppRouter` type signature with `createTRPCReact`.
```
not sure the second half of the sentence adds anything here

Author: I wrote this because I was thinking about the fact folks using Next.js should still use `createTRPCReact` at this step, instead of `createTRPCNext`.

I'm going to delete the sentance because I agree with you it doesn't affect any of the steps someone should take and will consider adding an `:::info` to highlight this earlier in the page. I think that will also address some of the feedback re: placing this in `/react`

```ts title='trpcMockedProvider.ts'
const mockedtRPC = createTRPCReact<AppRouter>({
  unstable_overrides: {
    useMutation: {
      async onSuccess(opts) {
        await opts.originalFn();
        await opts.queryClient.invalidateQueries();
      },
    },
  },
});
```

### 2. Create your mocked tRPC provider

> Now we just need to create a wrapper that exposes the client. This process is similar to [the React setup](/reactjs/introduction.mdx) however we don't need to utilize the `useState` hook because our tests are not using SSR.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the specific equivalent part of the React docs? (https://trpc.io/docs/react#3-add-trpc-providers)

```ts title='trpcMockedProvider.ts'
// @ts-expect-error tRPC utilizes global fetch
global.fetch = fetch;

const mockedtRPCClient = mockedtRPC.createClient({
  links: [

>     loggerLink({ enabled: () => false }),

Author: You are completely correct! I've removed this line.

>     httpBatchLink({ url: "http://localhost:3000/api/trpc" }),

Author: What it means is that when you define request handlers with `msw-trpc`, it is only listening for the specific HTTP RPC endpoint for the intended endpoint you specify from the router. When you batch things, it doesn't create any errors in this instance, however, a request handler won't exist in `msw`'s "server" to intercept the resulting HTTP call.

In this instance, you'll see a bright yellow warning in your terminal (assuming you are executing a test) letting you know that the component sent a request that wasn't intercepted. Honestly, I've struggled to get a `mockedTRPCClient` running without specifying a batch link. Would appreciate your insight if I'm doing something goofy.

>     httpBatchLink({ url: "http://localhost:3000/api/trpc" }),

Reviewer: It seems to me like it will be fairly easy to trigger this issue, for example in a component that fires two different queries when it mounts. If at all possible we should try to get this working.

```ts title='trpcMockedProvider.ts'
export const renderWithProviders = (
  ui: ReactElement,
  options?: Omit<RenderOptions, "wrapper">
) => {
  return render(ui, {
    wrapper: (props) => <TRPCMockedProvider {...props} />,
    ...options,
  });
};
```

:::note

- If you already have a similar to render a component with providers in tests, you may choose to import `TRPCMockedProvider` to that function instead, this is a simple example for demonstration purposes.
- If you don't want to use a custom hook like the one illustrated, you may also choose to simply use the return value of the function.

:::

## Using mocks

Now we have `TRPCMockedProvider`, we can start writing and using mocks. The following examples will use [Mock Service Worker](https://mswjs.io/) to intercept our API calls and return a response, as well as [`msw-trpc`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/msw-trpc) to utilize the type signature of your API when defining our [request handlers](https://mswjs.io/docs/getting-started/mocks/rest-api).

To mock data using your own router, start by installing both packages into your dev dependendies:

`npm install --save-dev msw msw-trpc`

### 1. Create your MSW handlers

> To utilize tRPC's typing superpowers, we can create a `mswTrpc` constant which generates a typed set of handlers for MSW, based on she shape of your `AppRouter`. This enables us to build handlers specific to our individual tests rapdily and with typesafety.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To utilize tRPC's typing superpowers, we can create a `mswTrpc` constant which generates a typed set of handlers for MSW, based on the shape of your `AppRouter`. This enables us to build handlers specific to our individual tests rapdily and with typesafety.
```

Author: Sweet, thank you!

```ts title='trpcMockedProvider.ts'
import type { AppRouter } from "path/to/your/router";
import { createTRPCMsw } from "msw-trpc";

// YOUR PROVIDER

export const trpcMsw = createTRPCMsw<AppRouter>();
```

:::note

> If you want to skip this step, it is possible to create standard REST handlers using `msw`s `rest` object and defining them to your network calls.

Reviewer: There is probably a more clear phrasing than "defining them to your network calls" but I can't figure out what it is right now either

Author: Agreed. I've tried making it more explicit, here's my rephrasing:

> If you want to skip this step, it is possible to create standard REST handlers using `msw`s `rest` object by manually defining the Request URL and Method corresponding to the tRPC procedure you want to mock.

:::

### 2. Use your handlers and mocks to simulate an API call

> Let's say that we recently defined an endpoint in our `cats` router serve everyone with information about our favorite cat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say that we recently defined an endpoint in our `cats` router to serve everyone with information about our favorite cat.
```

<details><summary>Backend code</summary>

```ts title='server/routers/cats.ts'
export const catsRouter = router({
  bestCat: publicProcedure
    .input(z.object({ name: z.string() }))
    .query(({ input }) => {
      return {
        bestCat: `Hey ${input.name}! The best cat is Mozzie!`,
      };
    }),
});
```

</details>

In addition, we've also created a simple React component, `BestCat` that displays the return of this query.

<details><summary>Frontend code</summary>

```ts title='component/cats/BestCat.tsx'
export default const BestCat = () => {
  const { loading, error, data } = trpc.cats.bestCat.useQuery({ name: "John" })
  if (loading) return <p>Loading...</p>;
  return (

>     <StyledCatText>{data.bestCat}</StyledCatText>

Reviewer: I think the way you've written this component, data would still be nullable at this point?

Here's an example of how this is done in a different docs page: https://trpc.io/docs/react#4-fetch-data
tbh I don't like that version either as it shows "loading" on error, but maybe a reasonable compromise between correctness and not being too many lines of code to distract from what the actual topic is

Author: You are correct, I think there's always going to be that compromise, but I agree with the sentiment, especially as you get a linter error for an unused variable from `error` anyway. Here's my shot at handling this without adding extra lines:

```
export default const BestCat = () => {
  const { loading, error, data } = trpc.cats.bestCat.useQuery({ name: "John" })
  if (loading || error) return <p>Data unavaliable</p>;
  return (
    <StyledCatText>{data.bestCat}</StyledCatText>
  )
}
```

  )
}
```

</details>

Finally, we want to verify that our component is working as we anticipated, so we write a test.

```ts title='component/cats/BestCat.spec.tsx'
describe("BestCat", () => {
  it("should render the result of our query", async () => {

>     render(<BestCat />);

Reviewer: I feel like showing this incorrect example first isn't helpful. Maybe just go straight to the correct one, and explain why it's correct?
